# Brooks, P (1996) The Empty Space. [pdf] Touchstone; New York. Available at: https://cdn.preterhuman.net/texts/religion.occult.new_age/occult.conspiracy.and.related/Brook,%20Peter%20-%20The%20Empty%20Space.pdf [Accessed 21.11.2021] 

 

Brooks *The Empty Space* outlines his four characterisations of theatre, firstly as Deadly (bad theatre), Holy (beauty, truth, other highfalutin ideals), Rough (popular theatre, where theatre is a window to the sensibilities of the audience) and Immediate (the focus of the moment, of preparation for an audience and the clarity that brings, in terms of purpose).  

The chapter on rough theatre was particularly engaging. 

> If the holy [theatre] makes a world in which a prayer is more real than a belch, in the rough theatre, it is the  other  way round. 

Clearly Brooks is a huge admirer of Berthold Brecht, and a good third of the ‘Rough’ chapter espouses key readings and interpretations on theatrical paradigms that Brecht introduced. One such idea involved a lengthy appraisal of Brecht’s concept of *Alienation*, “for alienation is a call to halt: alienation is cutting, interrupting, holding something up to the light, making us look again. Alienation is above all an appeal to the spectator to work for himself, so to become more and more responsible for accepting what he sees only if it is convincing to him in an adult way.” 

By all accounts, Brecht creates moments of clarity in the halting, meaningful moments of a play or performance, where signs that can only be appreciated in an “adult way” give rise to impactful internalisations in the spectator. This surely refers to adult experiences of life and its many expressions and permutations, which can only develop in the uniquely temporal, culturally shared movements of individual lives. The specatator accepts what he sees because there are counterpoints of meaning created, interruptions that work at eliciting some characterisation and meaning in their audience. The phrase *alienation* is therefore an odd choice, semantically. The alien is always other, to my understanding. Though alien in the sense of an external agent reifying some chord of meaning in relation to what pre- and post-cedes it makes some sense. I should read some Brecht! 

Theatre is alluded to as being ‘play’ - a play is named as such, and juxtaposed with the idea of play, in too many languages to be a coincidence, but Brecht insists that theatre goers bring an adult subjectivity to their experience as audience – their interpretations of certain devices or messages is a critical and adult act, fostered by their experience as cultured agents – they cannot observe the play as the somnambulist might, immersed in the spectacle, lost to the spectacle (as might be the case in the best examples of ‘holy’ theatre). Theatre should not, or cannot, make us a child again. It can only hold up a mirror to the complexities of our lived experiences. 

Too much information can also be a bad thing. We can render so much detail into a scene or performance that we begin to lose the subject and the subject matter, the intention of a performative aspect or the implications of a representation.  

>‘[F]ully’ need not mean ‘lifelike.’ 

>Brecht separates the real from the unreal, and I believe that this has been the source of a giant confusion. In terms of semantics the subjective is always opposed to the objective, the illusion separated from the fact. Because of these, his theatre is forced to maintain two positions: public and private, official and unofficial, theoretical and practical. 

These are later referred to as more dialectical, as opposed to polarities. These states, for example ‘public and private,’ preclude one another. In attempting to reveal the illusory, Brecht may use a semantic device to engender the idea of illusion or of the illusory, thus, in its absence, reify the ‘real’. Likewise, the real, if presented in such a way, can communicate its dialectically inverse state, that of illusion. 

>Brecht stated there was something in the theatre called illusion, the implication was that there  was something else that was not illusion. So illusion became opposed to reality. 

Language is a key driver here, which Brooks deems in a holistic sense: as semiotic, not purely verbal or written discourse. 

>The exchange of impressions through images is our basic language: at the moment when one man expresses an image at that same instant the other man meets him in belief. The shared association is the language—if the association evokes nothing in the second person, if there is no instant of shared illusion, there is no exchange. […] In all communication, illusions materialize and disappear. 

Meaning and its message can therefore be seen as a capricious thing, but if layered carefully – if the image made is representationally stratified, or curated even, artifice falls away, as in that moment, a play is less about the veracity of an actor’s portrayal or convincing props, less about simulation and simulacrum, but theatre as the totality of the sign. 

> When Brecht spoke contemptuously of illusion, this was not what he was attacking. He meant the single sustained Picture, the statement that continued after its purpose had been served […] 

The below quote is a key consideration I think, where in attempting to introduce some new concept, or extended metaphor or technological solution or ‘rupture’, it is important not to go too far. Strenuous, overly esoteric, “heavy-handed” techniques might dislocate the play. This idea of “[keeping] the dart of imagination at play” is so important, and heavily reminiscent of Baudrillard, where in relation to the discord between ‘representation’ and  ‘real’, there must be some element of “illusion”: 

>Similitude is a dream and  must remain one, in order for a modicum of illusion and  a stage of  the imaginary to exist. One must never pass over to the side of the real, the side of the exact  resemblance of the world  to itself, of  the subject to itself. Because  then the image disappears.  

 

>The aim is not how to avoid illusion—everything is illusion, only some things seem more illusory than other. It is the heavy-handed Illusion that does not begin to convince us. On the other hand, the illusion that is composed by the flash of quick and changing impressions keeps the dart of the imagination at play. This illusion is like the single dot in the moving television picture: it only lasts for the instant its function demands. 

 
