# Dick, P. K. (2004) Ubik. Gollancz; London.

Ubik is the story of Joe Chip and his gang of anti-talents – people with a telekinetic ability to block individuals with psionic abilities, such as precognition. Joe works for an agency run by Glen Runciter, a close friend and long-time colleague, who recruited Joe for his unrivalled testing abilities (testing for talent and anti-talent). Glen still visits his deceased young wife at a moratorium in Switzerland, a place where cryonically-preserved individuals are held in suspension (half-life) between absolute life and death. Enough of her brain function is preserved that Glen is able to commune with her regarding personal and business matters, as she still helps to run the company even in death, though this signal is becoming weaker and weaker as her half-life diminishes. Contracted to a job on Lunar, Joe and the gang venture into space on an extremely lucrative espionage mission, where they are exploded on arrival by an anthropomorphic bomb of the business magnate Stanton Mick, their percieved employer.
After this point, the novel moves between shifting states of reality, wherein Joe Chip is at first certain he has saved his boss Glen by suspending him in half-life. When this fails however, Joe becomes increasingly confused by the changing world around him, which is receding rapidly into the past, the rapid-aging and disincorporation of his friends and colleagues, as well as the mysterious messages being left by Glen *in the world*, Joe resigns himself to the possibility that it may in fact be he and his colleagues that are being held in half-life after the explosion, and not his boss, Glen.
Half-lifers can commune with one another if they are situated in close proximity, though it turns out that there is a malevolent force at play here, namely Jory Miller, a young deceased boy in half-life at the same moratorium as Joe and his colleagues, as well as Glen’s wife Ella, whose spirit had, at the outset of the story, began to be overwhelmed by Jory, interrupting her signal, such is the strength of his desire and latent energy to communicate in death. Jory ‘devours’ the life force of those close to him, which is the fate of every one of Joe’s associates, though Ella has resisted this fate by becoming more and more distant, less attached to the ‘living’ world.
There are a number of key themes which I found fascinating in this text, most notably the idea of half-life. It is not merely a technological solution for organisms to exist for a short time after death, though to those in commune with the dead, it could be perceived as such. Dick creates an entire virtual world within this substrate, which enables more than merely the self, then *I*, to exist. This suspension is capable of sustaining a community of half-lifers if they are kept in close proximity to one another, which does imbue ideas of transcension, or even a spiritual, astral self. The half-lifers are presumably supported by the same electronic networks, but they share no informatic or data connection – there is no conceivable reason that they should be able to commune and interact with one another outside of some hypothesised metaphysical state. As an idea, this has more contemporary links to the virtual worlds we inhabit as modern day tech users, where a person is as inextricably linked to our electronic or data selves (social media profiles, messaging services, online banks/credit profiles etc) as our corporeal selves. There is a fascinating idea (or portrait) here of the prolifically tech-savvy misanthrope (maybe an oxymoron). Which self is more ‘real’ – the reclusive, physical self or the connected, hyperreal digital self?
Jory himself is a wonderful idea; partly for his malevolence, but more generally the thematic ideas he represents. Jory creates the world around himself and the others relentlessly; by all accounts, this takes a wealth of energy and life resource. This ‘creativity’ is a reason for his ‘soul eating’, as consuming/draining the spirits, essences, waning life force of those occupying his vision sustains his vision. Participation in the vision is initially implicit – he creates it for himself but also those he has entrapped, entwined, to toy with their perception – but the vision is not self-sustaining, thus, the audience must be slowly destroyed for Jory to outlive the vision. He also builds for them, to occupy himself, to stave off boredom, gradually aging the world as far back as he is able to imagine it. He does not know much about the aesthetics of the world pre-WW2, so the surging passages of time, which change absolutely everything about the world that Joe etc inhabit – models of cars, household technologies, architectures… - begin to slow as they reach this epoch. In a sense, Jory creates a virtual experience that – while confusing – is entirely plausible and just subtle enough that Glen’s best anti-talents, and primarily Joe, are swept away on its gentle absurdity. I am reminded here of the plasticity of the brain (Penny, 1994) and its ability to adapt to its surroundings, real or virtual, without contradistinction. I myself recently played a VR game, the object of which was to take a lift to the top-floor of a skyscraper and after its doors open, walk out onto a plank that you can jump off, plummeting 100+ floors to the ground. I watched a parent take that step, shouting in fear as he watched the world blur past in a vision of virtual suicide. But I myself could not do it. I could feel the rug beneath my feet; was aware of the people – family – watching me, chuckling, spatially close. Even thinking about it now, whilst typing, the thought has made my palms sweaty! My partner said at the time, as several young children were using the device, “What does that do to a young child’s brain?”
I think about the openness to experience cited in the Hart (2017)  paper. Their (younger generations) familiarity with tech from such an early age – its pervasiveness as a window to virtuality and new media, new modes of experience. And then I think too about *Ubik*, the elixir, the creamer, the cleaning device, the moisturiser, and on and on…. A product that can seemingly do *everything*, named for its ubiquity, its omnipresence. But its utility is more than its ubiquity. Being everywhere is one thing, but being able to *do* seemingly everything – even, within a half-life context, slow or reverse the passage of time – is entirely different. A blindingly obvious parallel here is technology; panacea, container of the [virtual] self, wires and signals, wireless catalogue of universal knowledge, insight and opinion… Are we everywhere too? In everything, just channelled through the mechanics of techno-suspension? Suspended in the delusions that are most compatible with our interpretation of societal-cultural models and paradigms? Caught in the steely web of the simulation (Baudrillard, 1981)?
Simulation is key. Have we reached a point now where large companies, data-harvesting the minutiae of our virtual profiles and online selves, inversely consume the user to survive and grow, like Jory?

